Title	Abstract	Citation	URL	firebehavior	fireecology	spatialforeststructure	forestmanagement	forestdynamics
Evaluating crown fire rate of spread predictions from physics-based models	"Modeling the behavior of crown fires is challenging due to the complex set of coupled processes that drive the characteristics of a spreading wildfire and the large range of spatial and temporal scales over which these processes occur. Detailed physics-based modeling approaches such as FIRETEC and the Wildland Urban Interface Fire Dynamics Simulator (WFDS) simulate fire behavior using computational fluid dynamics based methods to numerically solve the three-dimensional, time dependent, model equations that govern, to some approximation, the component physical processes and their interactions that drive fire behavior. Both of these models have had limited evaluation and have not been assessed for predicting crown fire behavior. In this paper, we utilized a published set of field-scale measured crown fire rate of spread (ROS) data to provide a coarse assessment of crown fire ROS predictions from previously published studies that have utilized WFDS or FIRETEC. Overall, 86% of all simulated ROS values using WFDS or FIRETEC fell within the 95% prediction interval of the empirical data, which was above the goal of 75% for dynamic ecological modeling. However, scarcity of available empirical data is a bottleneck for further assessment of model performance."	"Hoffman, C.M., Canfield, J., Linn, R.R., Mell, W., Sieg, C.H., Pimont, F. and Ziegler, J., 2016. Evaluating crown fire rate of spread predictions from physics-based models. Fire technology, 52(1), pp.221-237."	https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01283080/document	Y				
Spatially explicit measurements of forest structure and fire behavior following restoration treatments in dry forests	"Restoration treatments in dry forests of the western US often attempt silvicultural practices to restore the historical characteristics of forest structure and fire behavior. However, it is suggested that a reliance on non-spatial metrics of forest stand structure, along with the use of wildland fire behavior models that lack the ability to handle complex structures, may lead to uncharacteristically homogeneous rather than heterogeneous forest structures following restoration. In our study, we used spatially explicit forest inventory data and a physics based fire behavior model to investigate the effects of restoration driven, variable retention harvests on structural complexity, both of horizontal and vertical dimensions, and potential fire behavior. Structural complexity was assessed at stand and patch scales using a combination of point pattern analyses, a patch detection algorithm, and nearest-neighbor and tree patch indices of height variation. The potential fire behavior before and after treatment was simulated across a range of open wind speeds using a 3-D physics based fire behavior model, the Wildland-urban interface Fire Dynamics Simulator (WFDS). Our results show that treatments resulted in an aggregated spatial pattern of trees consisting of a matrix of individual trees, clumps and openings similar to descriptions of historical dry forests. Treatments had inconsistent effects on vertical complexity across sites likely due to differences in treatment of ladder fuels; lack of reference conditions hinder evaluation of this structural aspect. Simulation modeling using WFDS suggest that treatments moderated fire rate of spread, fireline intensity and canopy consumption across all wind speeds tested and shifted potential fire behavior towards historical ranges. Our findings suggest that current restoration-based variable retention harvests can simultaneously fulfill objectives of altering structural complexity and of reducing fire behavior, though we recommend further research on desired ranges of vertical complexity to inform treatment design."	"Ziegler, J.P., Hoffman, C., Battaglia, M. and Mell, W., 2017. Spatially explicit measurements of forest structure and fire behavior following restoration treatments in dry forests. Forest Ecology and Management, 386, pp.1-12."	https://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs_journals/2017/rmrs_2017_ziegler_j001.pdf	Y		Y	Y	
Tree Regeneration Spatial Patterns in Ponderosa Pine Forests Following Stand-Replacing Fire: Influence of Topography and Neighbors	": Shifting fire regimes alter forest structure assembly in ponderosa pine forests and may produce structural heterogeneity following stand-replacing fire due, in part, to fine-scale variability in growing environments. We mapped tree regeneration in eighteen plots 11 to 15 years after stand-replacing fire in Colorado and South Dakota, USA. We used point pattern analyses to examine the spatial pattern of tree locations and heights as well as the influence of tree interactions and topography on tree patterns. In these sparse, early-seral forests, we found that all species were spatially aggregated, partly attributable to the influence of (1) aspect and slope on conifers; (2) topographic position on quaking aspen; and (3) interspecific attraction between ponderosa pine and other species. Specifically, tree interactions were related to finer-scale patterns whereas topographic effects influenced coarse-scale patterns. Spatial structures of heights revealed conspecific size hierarchies with taller trees in denser neighborhoods. Topography and heterospecific tree interactions had nominal effect on tree height spatial structure. Our results demonstrate how stand-replacing fires create heterogeneous forest structures and suggest that scale-dependent, and often facilitatory, rather than competitive, processes act on regenerating trees. These early-seral processes will establish potential pathways of stand development, affecting future forest dynamics and management options."	"Ziegler, J.P., Hoffman, C.M., Fornwalt, P.J., Sieg, C.H., Battaglia, M.A., Chambers, M.E. and Iniguez, J.M., 2017. Tree regeneration spatial patterns in ponderosa pine forests following stand-replacing fire: Influence of topography and neighbors. Forests, 8(10), p.391."	http://www.mdpi.com/1999-4907/8/10/391/pdf		Y	Y		Y
Evaluating crown fire rate of spread from physics based simulations to field data	"Wildland fire behavior models are commonly used to augment expert opinions, experiments and field observations by both the research and management communities. However, modelling wildfires is challenging in part due to complex set of coupled processes that drive the properties of a spreading wildfire. Further these processes occur over a vast span of spatial and temporal scales that further complicate the development and validation of models. Due to these complications there has been a variety of model types developed for a variety of specific applications. Regardless of the type and purpose of a model, well quantified fire behavior data from wildland fires and field and laboratory experimental fires are necessary for a variety of reasons including the calibration of empirically based models, the evaluation of physically based or theoretical models, and to provide model developers with potential areas to improve model performance by identifying inadequacies in the code. Here we utilize a compiled data set of crown fire rate of spread from Alexander and Cruz (2006) to evaluate published crown fire rate of spread predictions from two physics-based fire behavior models HIGRAD/FIRETEC developed at Los Alamos National Laboratory and the Wildland Urban Interface Fire Dynamics Simulator (WFDS) developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology and the USDA Forest Service. Our preliminary results suggest that physics based models reasonably predict the crown fire rate of spread given the current data set. In addition we discuss the sensitivity of physics based models to a variety of parameters which likely influence crown fire rate of spread."	"Hoffman, C.M., Linn, R.R., Mell, W., Sieg, C., Pimont, F. and Ziegler, J., 2014. Evaluating crown fire rate of spread from physics based simulations to field data. In: Advances in forest fire research, Viegas, Domingos Xavier (ed.)"	https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01336822/	Y				
A model for estimating windbreak carbon within COMET-Farm	"Agroforestry as a land management practice presents a method for partially offsetting greenhouse gas emissions from agricultural land. Of all agroforestry practices in the United States, windbreaks in particular are used throughout the United States providing a useful starting point for deriving a modelling system which could quantify the amount of carbon sequestered on U.S. agricultural land and provide for broad usability. We present our first approximation to this end by presenting a model that estimates current and future stocks within multiple carbon pools of windbreak systems such as live trees, the O horizon, downed woody debris and standing dead trees. In this article, we describe each modelled process driving carbon fluxes within carbon pools including novel windbreak tree growth and mortality models. Our model is generalized by region and species group allowing us to run scenarios for any common tree species in any location within the contiguous United States. Integrated into the agricultural greenhouse gas accounting tool, COMET-Farm™, the windbreak component gives landowners and land managers power to view agroforestry systems in the same context as agricultural operations and provides an alternative to intensive biomass inventories."	"Ziegler, J., Easter, M., Swan, A., Brandle, J., Ballesteros, W., Domke, G., Chambers, A., Eve, M. and Paustian, K., 2016. A model for estimating windbreak carbon within COMET-Farm™. Agroforestry systems, 90(5), pp.875-887."	https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10457-016-9977-0					Y
